Total pages: 9

=== PAGE 1 ===
www.readinga-z.com
Visit www.readinga-z.com  
for thousands of books and materials.LEVELED BOOK • W
Written by Kira FreedHoofed Animals
A Reading A–Z Level W Leveled Book
Word Count: 1,342
 hoofed 
AnimalS
Writing
Create a Venn diagram comparing one 
odd-toed ungulate with one even-toed ungulate. Write a paragraph summarizing the information.
Science
Use the book and outside resources to create a model of the habitat of one animal from the book. Label your model to show how the animal is able to survive in its environment.Connections

=== PAGE 2 ===
Correlation
LEVEL W
S
40
40Fountas & Pinnell
Reading Recovery
DRAHoofed Animals
Level W Leveled Book© Learning A–ZWritten by Kira Freed
All rights reserved.www.readinga-z.comPhoto Credits:
Front cover: © Rolf Kopfle/ardea.com; title page, page 12 (top): © Peter Fuchs/Dreamstime.com; pages 3, 6 (bottom), 8, 9, 10 (center), 11 (top); 12 (bottom), 14 (top right): © ArtToday; page 4 (top): © Jankojerinic/Dreamstime.com; pages 4 (bottom), 7 (bottom), 10 (bottom), 14 (bottom left, bottom right): © Jupiterimages Corporation page 6 (top): © Frans Lanting/National Geographic Stock; page 6 (top center): © iStock.com/Hedda Gjerpen; page 6 (bottom center): © iStock.com/Alexey Repka; page 7 (top): © Stanisa Martinovic/Dreamstime.com; page 10 (top):© iStock.com/Charles Gibson; page 11 (bottom): © iStock.com/Uros Ravbar; page 13: © Paul Tessier/123RF; page 14 (top left): © iStock.com/DeeAnnaPiatek; page 15: © Tomas Hajek/Dreamstime.com
Illustration Credits:
Page 5: Nora Voutas/© Learning A–Zhoofed 
Anima lSWords to Know
browserscannon bonecarnivoresdomesticatedfusedgrazersherbivoreskeratinomnivoressuccessfulungulates
www.readinga-z.com
What are ungulates?Focus QuestionWritten by Kira Freed

=== PAGE 3 ===
3 4Table of Contents
What Are Hoofed Animals?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
Odd-Toed Ungulates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
Even-Toed Ungulates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   10
Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
Glossary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16What Are Hoofed 
Animals?
Hoofed animals are  
among the most graceful  
creatures on Earth . Large,  
powerful, and designed  for speed, they are  
beautiful and fascinating .  
In addition to admiring  them in the wild, humans  
have visited them in zoos, hunted them, and kept them as sources of milk, meat, wool, labor, 
transportation, and companionship .
Hoofed animals all belong to a group of 
mammals called ungulates (UN-gyu-luts) . All 
modern ungulates are related to an extinct group 
of hoofed mammals that lived 65 million years 
ago . Ungulates have hooves made of a material 
called keratin covering their toes . Hooves are like 
giant toenails that serve as 
protection for their feet .
A gazelle
Horses have worked for 
humans for thousands of years.
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 4 ===
5 6Most hoofed animals are herbivores (plant 
eaters), and many of them are food for carnivores 
(meat eaters) . One of their primary challenges  
in life is to flee fast enough to avoid being killed 
by predators such as humans, lions, wolves, 
and hyenas . Because they need to run, hoofed 
animals have long, strong legs and feet .
Hoofed animals’ skeletons are specially shaped 
to help them run quickly  . A human foot has five 
separate bones connecting the toes to the ankle, but many hoofed animals instead have one long, 
solid bone connecting the toes (hoof) to the ankle . 
This solid bone, called 
a cannon bone, makes 
hoofed animals’ legs longer to help them 
run farther and faster  . 
The cannon bones also make hoofed animals’ 
legs more solid  and stable to better 
support their weight .
Scientists place hoofed animals into two 
different groups based on whether the animals walk on an odd or even number of toes . We’ll  
look at these two groups separately, including some well-known members of each group .Odd-Toed 
Ungulates
Odd-toed 
ungulates include 
rhinoceroses, horses, 
zebras, donkeys, and 
several other animals . 
Rhinos have three toes 
on each foot, while the 
horselike ungulates 
have just one toe (their 
hoof) on each foot .
These animals 
primarily inhabit 
warm environments 
around the world . 
They live in a variety 
of habitats, including 
forests, grasslands, 
and deserts . The food 
they eat—grasses 
and other plants—is difficult to digest, and 
their stomachs require 
the assistance of tiny 
bacteria to break it 
down .
FOOT BONES OF HORSE 
AND HUMAN
cannon 
bone
five bones  
connecting the toes  
to the ankle
Horse
Zebra
Rhino
Donkey
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 5 ===
7 8Horses —The 
only truly wild 
horses alive 
today inhabit the 
dry grasslands 
of Eurasia . The 
“wild” horses 
living in North 
and South America and Australia actually are domesticated breeds that have escaped human 
control and grown wild . Horses can survive in 
environments with little food and water, but they 
must spend most of their time grazing to take in 
enough grass—and nutrients—to survive .
Before machinery became commonplace, 
horses pulled wagons and plowed fields .  
In modern times, horse lovers keep them for 
companionship, riding, and racing .Zebras —All wild zebras live in Africa, and 
they primarily eat tall grasses . Aside from their 
famous stripes, zebras are similar to horses 
in appearance . The main enemies of zebras 
are lions, hyenas, and wild dogs, as well as 
humans who hunt them for their skins . There 
are three main kinds of zebras: plains, desert, 
and mountain zebras . Some species of zebras are 
severely endangered .
Do You Know?
A zebra’s bold black-and-white stripes are a form of camouflage. 
The stripes help it to blend in with other zebras, especially when 
the entire herd is running. By blending in, a zebra is less likely to be singled out by a predator.
A zebra’s stripes are as unique as human fingerprints. No two 
zebras’ stripes are alike!
Racehorses thrill us with their speed.
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 6 ===
9 10Rhinoceroses —The rhino, which is native  
to parts of Africa and Asia, is another ungulate 
that is seriously endangered . Few rhinos are  
still alive in the wild; most now live on protected 
land, including national parks and nature 
preserves . Rhinos live on plains and in forested 
and swampy areas, where they consume grasses, 
leaves, and other plants .
Rhinos are the second-largest land mammals 
after elephants . Rhinos are easy to recognize by 
the horns on their noses, their large heads, and 
their massive bodies covered with dark, leathery 
skin . Rhino horns are made of keratin, the same 
material as hooves . Some kinds of rhinos have 
one horn, while other kinds have two .Even-Toed Ungulates
Even-toed ungulates are 
a large group of animals that includes deer, cattle, sheep, 
goats, antelope, camels, hippos, 
and giraffes . Some even-toed ungulates, such as camels, have 
only two toes on each foot, while others, such as hippos, have four 
toes on each foot .
Even-toed ungulates, one of 
the most numerous groups of 
mammals on Earth, are native to 
every continent except Australia 
and Antarctica . They are what 
scientists call “successful” animals, meaning they have reproduced, spread out, and adapted to a 
wide variety of environments .
Pigs and hogs, called swine, are intelligent 
omnivores (eating both plants and animals) with 
round, stocky bodies, long heads 
with a flexible snout, and tusks 
that point up . They have four toes 
on each foot, with the middle two 
being the largest . Swine originally 
lived in the wild in Europe, Asia, 
and northern Africa .
Rhinos are rare and unusual.Camel
Hippo
Warthog
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 7 ===
11 12They are now raised throughout the world  
as a food animal and are hunted in the wild .
Giraffes are inhabitants of African 
grasslands that have permanent 
short, bony horns covered by 
furry skin that is never shed . 
Giraffes are famous for their 
unusually long necks, their 
pattern of spots, and their long blue-gray 
tongues . Male giraffes compete with each other 
for dominance by wrestling with their necks and 
hammering each other with their heads .
Hippos are large, heavy African animals that 
spend most of their time in water  . They don’t 
really swim, but instead walk on the bottoms  of lakes and rivers . They have slightly webbed 
feet with four toes and huge teeth that point  
up . Their herbivorous diet consists of grasses, 
leaves, fallen fruit, and other 
plants, most of which grow 
underwater  .Camels are large herbivorous animals that have 
long, curved necks, one or two humps on their backs, and two toes on each foot . One-humped 
camels live in deserts in the Middle East, India, 
and North Africa, while two-humped camels live 
in deserts and windy grasslands in central Asia . Both kinds of 
camels are well suited to habitats 
where food and water are scarce . 
Camels store fat in their humps, 
which helps them to survive when 
they must endure long periods  
of time without food . Few camels still exist in  
the wild; most are kept as pack animals, and  
one-humped camels are also used for riding .
Pronghorn antelopes are herbivores that 
inhabit the grasslands of North America . Males 
and females both have permanent one-spiked, or pronged, horns made of bone 
and covered by a layer of fused 
hairs, which is shed each year  . 
Pronghorns are extremely fast, and 
healthy adults can easily outrun 
predators . The most serious threat to pronghorn survival occurs in 
the first two months of life, when 
coyotes kill fawns in large numbers .
Do You Know?
An adult hippo can eat up to  
136 kilograms (300 lb.) of plants in 
a single day! That’s like you eating 
more than 1 ,200 veggie burgers a day.
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 8 ===
13 14Deer, including elk, moose, and caribou,  
are herbivores . Some are grazers (eating mostly 
grass), but most are browsers (eating leaves, 
shoots, twigs, and other plant parts) . Deer  
are found in many habitats around the world, 
including grasslands, forests, rainforests, and 
tundra . Many deer migrate with the changing 
seasons to locate food .
Most male deer grow antlers, which are made 
of bone and covered in furry skin called velvet 
while they are growing . Antlers grow before the 
mating season, fall off after it, and grow again the 
following year  . Caribou are the only kind of deer 
in which the females have antlers .Cattle, sheep, goats, and antelopes vary  
widely in shape and coloring; however, they all share the feature of growing permanent 
horns made of bone and covered with a layer of keratin . All the males of this group and some 
females have horns; each horn is always a single 
spike . The horns can be simple, curved, or spiral 
in shape, and antelopes often have horns that  
are elaborately shaped . Many domesticated 
animals in this group are kept for milk, meat,  
and wool .
Do You 
Know?
The largest 
member of the 
deer family is the 
moose. Its antlers can weigh as 
much as a typical 
11-year-old child, and those antlers 
can grow up to 
25 millimeters  (1 in.) a day!
Horns come in many shapes and sizes. Clockwise, from top left: Texas 
longhorn steer, bighorn sheep, kudu antelope, goats
Hoofed Animals • Level W

=== PAGE 9 ===
15 16Conclusion
Ungulates are diverse creatures, each with a 
unique body and lifestyle that make it perfectly 
suited to the habitat in which it lives . Many 
ungulates, such as swine, sheep, and cattle, are 
raised in great numbers for food, milk, and hides . 
But many wild ungulates, such as the rhino, are 
endangered and survive only in captivity  . Others 
are at risk of suffering the same fate because of environmental destruction, hunting, and other 
threats to their well-being . Habitat preservation 
and respect for life will allow these amazing 
animals to continue to survive into the future .Glossary
browsers (n.)  animals that eat leaves, shoots, twigs, 
and other plant parts (p . 13)
cannon bone the long, single foot bone found in   
(n.) hoofed animals (p . 5)
carnivores (n.) animals that only eat meat (p . 5)
domesticated (adj.)  of or relating to animals that are raised for human use (p . 7)
fused (adj.)  joined together (p . 12)
grazers (n.)  animals that feed on grass or other plants that grow near ground level  (p . 13)
herbivores (n.) animals that only eat plants (p . 5)
keratin (n.)  a strong material produced by the bodies of some animals that makes 
up hair, hooves, claws, feathers, and 
fingernails (p . 4)
omnivores (n.)  animals that eat both plants and other animals (p . 10)
successful (adj.)  having the desired result; ending  
in success (p . 10)
ungulates (n.) animals with hooves (p . 4)
Index
antelope, 10, 12, 14
camels, 10, 12
cattle, 10, 14, 15
deer, 10, 13
donkeys, 6
giraffes, 10, 11
goats, 10, 14
hippos, 10, 11horses, 4, 6, 7, 8
moose, 13
pronghorn antelope, 12
rhinoceroses (rhinos),  
  6, 9, 15
sheep, 10, 14
swine, 10
zebras, 6, 8
 Wild horses running free: a sight that is becoming rare.
Hoofed Animals • Level W
